Export ing to Europe Guide  
   Pho
to by PxHere 
This guide will take you through the process of exporting to Europe 
in 12 steps, starting from what makes Europe an interesting market, 
moving on to getting prepared and started , to finally see ing how 
you can grow your exports once you are actually exporting.  
Steps  
Step 1: Why export to Europe?  
Step 2: Is there a European market for your products?  
Step 3: How do you get your company ready for exporting to Europe? 
Step 4: How does exporting to Europe work?  
Step 5: Do your products meet the requirements?  
Step 6: In which market segment do your products fit? 
Step 7: Through which channel can you reach your European buyer?  
Step 8: Where can you find a buyer?  
Step 9: How can you approach a buyer?  
Step 10: How do you negotiate a deal?  
Step 11: How can you organi se logistics and customs procedures?  
Step 12: How can you grow your exporting business to Europe?  Step 1:  Why export to Europe ? 
Why this step is important  
 
The m ore than 500 million consumers and 21 million small and medium -sized enterprises (SMEs) in 
Europe could offer you, as an exporter, interesting opportunities. Together, the European Union ’s 27 
members account for 16% of the world ’s imports and exports.  
Figure 1: The  European Union  
 
Exporting is a strategic choice that  requires commitment both in terms of time and money. There are 
different reasons to export, such as:  
• evidence that there are international customers willing  to buy your products ; 
• more business opportunities in international markets ; 
• more profitable business in international markets ; 
• spreading risks over more markets ; 
• production capacity not fully u tilised ; 
• belie ving that your product will be successful in other markets ; 
• keeping up with the competition  by also going international; 
• particular interest in one or more new target countries. 
 Before deciding to start exporting , make  sure you know that you have a solution to a customer’s 
problem and that your decision  fits with your company’s strategy, goals and capacity. Exporting 
means venturing into a new market. As this often means adapting your product, the level of 
adaptation needed may result into partly new products, which itself creates new risks , because then  
both the market and the product are new.  
 
What you need to know  
Choosing to export to Europe must fit your company ’s plans , just like your products must fit the 
foreign markets you are targeting. Maybe you are already exporting to other markets, or have 
already successfully sold products to European companies. In order to make exporting to Europe part 
of your company strategy, be aware that:  
• exporting requires thorough preparation : the European markets are competitive and 
customer expectations are high ; 
• you may be required to scale up your production : minimum orders can be high; 
• new markets mean new sets of requirements, preferences and cultures that you need to 
adapt to ; 
• your staff will need to adapt too . This may require additional training ; 
• exporting req uires  extra  financial resources because it brings extra costs with it  — think of 
international marketing, sending samples by courier, travel expenses and potentially product 
and equipment modifications ; 
• the benefits are generally a long way away: regardles s of how good  your preparations are, it 
often takes years of learning by doing before the benefits can be reaped.  
 
In brief, exporting to Europe offers opportunities, but it requires commitment  and investment . You 
must be willing and able to invest in your company to get it export ready.  
 
[Video: CBI Market Information  – English Version ] 
 
 
Tips , including re sources and  assistance:  
• Before deciding, make sure you have a clear picture of what your  customers are looking for 
and what it takes to meet their expectation s. Follow the steps in this guide and make use of 
the resources listed to get a good picture of Europe as a target market for your company. 
You can also look into this guide on Exporting to Europe . 
• Investigate financing opportunities with  banks or development finance institutions . 
 
  Step 2: Is there a European market for your products?  
 
Why this step is important  
Before investing in export preparations, you must make sure whether  there is a market for your 
products in Europe. The question is how to find out if there is a market for your product, then work 
out the best strategy to find those customers.  
 If the answer is yes,  that there is a market,  the next question is to work out your strategy: find out 
which European countries and which channels offer the best opportunities. That way you know where to focus your preparatio ns. Sometimes , the countries with the highest demand may be served 
best by exporting to another country that then distributes to that country.  
 
What you need to know  
The easiest way to get a first impression of where you can find opportunities for your pro ducts is to 
make use of information available online. This means consulting statistics databases and reading up 
on the characteristics of a sector, including trends, to see if your products fit the market.  
 Note that this is a starting point. If your product is not imported to your potential target market, it does not automatically mean that there are no opportunities. Likewise, a declining market does not mean a market with no opportunities . But this initial research will let you know what is going on in a 
market, to further finetune in steps to follow.  
 When a product crosses the border with Europe, it is registered at customs (read more in Step 11: How can you organi se logistics and customs procedures?). This information is not only used for 
customs procedures, but also for trade data: import and export figures are based on these registrations. Note that this does not apply to services, as services do not physically cross borders. Sector associations are gen erally good places for market descriptions of services.  
 If you know which questions to ask and consequently how to look up the answers in statistical databases, you will find that figures will provide a first, general idea of a market.  
 
These are example questions you can use when consulting a database:  
• How much do your potential target markets import? By comparing for instance all European 
countries, you can find out which the largest imports are.  
• Which markets are growing? Look up import figures for more  than one year, that way you 
will see in which markets demand is growing – sometimes growing markets offer more 
opportunities than large, stable markets.  
• Do your potential target countries already import from your country? By looking at where the imports c ome from, you can tell whether business already takes place between your 
countries. If your potential target markets already know your country, it could be easier to find interested buyers.  
• Which are the largest supplying countries to your potential target  markets? Similarly to the 
information on your country’s supplies, other supplying countries can be found. This will give you information on where the main competition comes from.  
 Statistics will give you information on the type of product you have. But you also need to know if 
your products fit the European trends. If not, there may well be a market for your type of product, 
but not for your specific product.   
Researching trends means finding out if your flavours, colours, materials, styles and so on correspond to what the European market is looking for. You can read up on trends online or subscribe to newsletters, for instance from sector associations, trade press and trade fairs. Trade organisations, such as the CBI and our partners, also offer studies o n trends.  
  
Tips (incl. sources & assistance):  
• Read our market information available for your sector
. Start by choosing your sector. This 
will lead you to a page with all market information available fo r your sector.  
• Look up statistical trade data for the European market in the Trade Helpdesk  
(Access2Markets). Identify your product code, this will allow you to answer the questions 
discussed above. Whic h countries are the largest importers in Europe? Which countries show 
the largest growth? How much of the imports come from your country? Which countries are 
the largest suppliers to the European market?  
• You can also look up global statistical data in ITC’s Trade Map , which will allow you to answer 
the same research questions as in the examples above, not only for European markets but for countries worldwide.  
• Watch this video from the US International Trade Administration on Selecting Initial Export 
Markets . 
• Trade fairs are good sources for spotting trends and their websites will give you the latest for your sector. To find out specific trade fairs
, identify your sector on our market information 
platform  and read our 10 tips for finding buyers. Large trade fairs include Biofach  for organic 
products, Maison & Objet  for home decoration and textiles and Fruit Logistica  for fresh 
produce . 
• Identify relevant sector associations, trade press and other sources which offer information on European trends for your sector. Our market information platform is a good starting point. Here, you can identify your sector and read our study on trends
 for your sector, 
including several source you can use.  
  
Quote:  
I won’t lie: doing research was frustrating and tedious ; you really have to be dedicated to make it 
work. But I would absolutely recommend us ing the tools CBI provides. The world is getting more 
competitive every day. Market research helped me to be competitive, even against huge design 
businesses from China and Thailand. My pricing, my product styling,  and how I organi se my 
production are so m uch better because of it.  
Ayesha Mawji  
CEO Moyo Designs, Tanzania 
  
Step 3: How do you get your company ready for exporting 
to Europe ? 
 
Why this step is important  
So, you have researched the European market well enough to conclude that it does offer 
opportunities  for you. You are  committed to exporting to Europe  and i t is now time to invest in 
getting your company ready. Doing business in new markets requires adapting your company to 
meet the requirements there. The exact requirements will be clear when you negotiate your first 
order. However, at that time you must be able to respond. Anticipating which changes and flexibility are required will make you better prepared.  
 You and your staff may need to work in a new language in order to communicate with new business 
relations. Your products may need some modification to fit the new markets. And production may need to be scaled up.  
 
What you need to know  
Below you is  a list of questions you need to ask yourself  when getting your company ready  for the 
market opportunities you have identified. Going through the list will give you a first indication of 
where your stren gths lie, and which parts  you need to work on.  
 
Peopl e 
Do you have enough people with the right capacity?  
Do you have employees who can carry out market research?  
Do you have experience in finding and profiling potential customers? Do you have people with the right language skills?  
Can you identify yourself with your new market and its culture?  
Do you have export experience?  
 Production  
Do you have enough production capacity?  
Is production cost effective?  
Do you have  a quality control system compliant with European and international standards?  
Do you  have all the required facilities?  
 Product  
Would you be able to modify your products if needed for European markets?  
Do your products or your company have any certification for sustainability, organic  production or any 
other type, awarded by an international standard  recogni sed in Eu rope? 
 Money  
Can you  invest in exports?  
Do you have access to finance for additional  investments?  
 
Tips , incl uding  resources and  assistance : 
• Find out how to get started with your export preparations . You can use online guides, such as 
this U S International Trade Administration video: Are Y ou Export Ready?  and the 
Australian 
Trade and Investment Commission’s Guide to Exporting . • Take the Export Quiz: Are You Ready ?, from Global Affairs Canada, which is designed for 
Canadian companies but cover topics that are relevant for all exporters.  
• Follow  one or more of the following ITC e-learning course s: Considering Export Markets , 
Approaching Banks for F inancing and Setting Up an Export Marketing Strategy . 
• Find out what assistance business support organisations in your country offer , like what  
Vietrade  (Vietn am), ASEPEX  (Senegal) PromPeru , ProColombia, ProEcuador , and Agexport  
(Guatemala)  offer,  to mention just a few.  
 
  
 
Quote: Advice to fellow entrepreneurs from a CBI programme participant:  
You have to learn that exporting to Europe needs an investment on your side first: in time, in 
resources, in building relationships, in learning about cultures.  
Shoaib Zahid Malik,  
CEO at Kausar, Pakistan   
Step 4: How does exporting to Europe  work?  
 
Why  this step is  important  
Exporting to Europe means exporting to one or more European countr ies and all the ir differences in 
culture, language and preferences . However, exporting to European countries may also have some 
several practical similarities . Cooperation among European countries is far reaching. When it comes 
to practical international trade issues, such as legal import requirements  and border control, 
European Union Member C ountries operate as  one single market.  
 What you need to know  
These are the 27 European countries members to the European Union
: 
• Austria  
• Belgium  
• Bulgaria  
• Croatia  
• Cyprus  
• Czech  Republic  
• Denmark  
• Estonia  
• Finland  
• France  
• Germany  
• Greece  
• Hungary  
• Ireland  
• Italy  
• Latvia  
• Lithuania  
• Luxembourg  
• Malta  
• Netherlands  
• Poland  
• Portugal  
• Romania  
• Slovakia  
• Slovenia  
• Spain  
• Sweden  
 
In a 2016 referendum, the United Kingdom  voted yes to leav ing the EU , a political process known as 
Brexit . After three years of negotiations and postponements, in November 2019 the British 
government and the European Union reached an agreement for the withdrawal of the UK from the 
EU. New arrangements and rules, including a transitional period were finalized by  January 2021 .  For more information  dealing with the UK market after Brexit , see the British government Brexit page  
or the European Commission Brexit page . 
Thes e four European countries are not EU Members, but take part  in the European Free Trade 
Association (EFTA) : 
• Norway  
• Switzerland  
• Iceland  
• Liechtenstein  
Cooperation among these four countries and their relations with countries in the EU is not as far 
reaching as among European Union Members . However , the countries in the European Free Trade 
Association and the European Union together form the European Economic Area  (EEA) , which means 
these 32 counties operate as  one single market.  Switzerland is not part of the EEA, but has bilateral 
agreements with the EU to participate in the single market.  In practice, people, goods, services and 
money can move between the countries in the single market  (also called internal market)  as freely as 
they would within a single country. For you, as a producer, it means that once your products enter 
the single market, they have access to all countries with out going through additional customs 
procedures  to move from one EU country to another . 
For goods to enter the European single market and move freely around it , they must meet 
requirements  which have been harmonised among European Union Members by common European 
legislation . Read more in Step 5: Do your products meet the requirements?  
 
[map single market: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:EU_Single_Market.svg  ] 
Dark blue: European Union  
Light blue: European Free Trade Association  
 
Both the European Union and the European Free Trade Association ha ve trade agreements  with 
many countries  in force . These agreements allow countries to do trade with countries in the single 
market without or at reduced customs tariffs. If your country has an existing trade agreem ent with 
the European Union , you have an advantage compared to an exporter in a country that does not. The 
European Union  also includes trade in its development policies. The European Commission has 
introduced the Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs)  and the General ised Scheme of Prefe rences 
(GSP)  to stimulate trade with development countries: 
• Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) are trade and development agreements between 
the European Union and African, Caribbean and Pacific countries and regions. The se 
agreements go beyond free -trade agreements  to include European cooperation and 
assistance in  helping the partner countries benefit from the partnerships . 
• The General ised Scheme of Preferences (GSP)  removes import duties on products coming 
from vulnerable developing countries to the European Union . 
 
Tips , incl uding  resources and  assistance : 
• Learn more about  how the European Union works  and what it means for you. If relevant, find out 
what the European Free Trade Association is  and what it means for you.  
• Want to target the United Kingdom? F ollow the aftermath of Brexit , the process of the United 
Kingdom leaving the European Union , to find out w hat consequences it may have for you.  
• Find out which trade agreements your country has or is negotiating  with the European Union . Do 
you know where your competitors are ? Find out if they trade with the EU according to the same 
rules  or not . 
• Are you targeting one of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) countries ? Find out if the 
EFTA has any trade agreements  with your country. Do countries where your competition is based 
have similar agreements?  
• Consult this ove rview of E uropean Union  trade policy , which  allow s you to compare the rules 
applying to different countries.  
• Although the EU Member Countries largely operate jointly as one single market, the differences 
from one count ry to another are still significant, from language to business culture . Depending 
on the product or service you offer, cluster ing countries based on language or cultural similarities 
that are relevant for your offer may be an interesting option. 
• Make use of services offered by European support programmes. For instance, see our market 
information on several sectors and analysed specifically for exporters in developing countries . In 
addition, check out our projects and programmes . 
• Look also into what our partner organisations offer: Belgian Development Agency ( Enabel) ; 
International Trade Centre (ITC) ; Chamber Trade Sweden ; Virke, the Enterprise Federation of 
Norway ; Germany’s Import Promotion Desk (IPD)  and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) ; Finnpartnership ; Switzerland Global Enterprise  and Swiss Import 
Promotion Programme (SIP PO) 
 Quote: Advice to fellow entrepreneurs from CBI programme participant:  
Be patient. It’s not an instant coffee thing. Sit down, learn and plan.  
Andrew Mutisya  
Head of Business Development Bawa Hope, Kenya  
  
Step 5: Do your products meet the requirements?  
 
Why this step is important  
Before offering it to clients in the European market, you product  must meet the European 
requirements. Some of these requirements are established by law, so  your product will not be 
allowed to enter the European market  if it do esn’t meet these legal requirements . This means that 
your product can be rejected when checked at an European border , which would cost you money 
and damage your reputation  with buyers . 
 
On top of legal requirements, your product also has to comply  with European b uyers ’ own  
requirements. A lot of these buyer requirements are common among European companies and 
industry associations. You will also have to meet those  and they can vary among countr ies, segment s, 
etc. 
 
What you need to know  
In principle , legal requirements for your products are the same in all European Union countries. 
However, there are some exceptions.  
 
There are four types of legislation set for products marketed in Europe, provided for by the European Commission’s Regulations and Directives:  
 
1. Framework legislation  setting the bas es for a sector. For food products , for example,  this is 
the General Food Law
, which ensures  that all food marketed in the European Union must be 
safe. For consumer goods , the General Product Safety Directive  plays a similar role, ensuring 
that all products must be safe. Safety is a basic requirement that applies  in all cases, 
including those not covered  in any specific legislation.  
2. Legislation restricting substances, chemicals and contaminants . This legislation sets  limits 
sometimes in the form of positive  lists of substances that can be used in certain products, 
such as  preservatives in cosmetics . They often do not apply to final products , but to specific 
substance s, regardless of the product in which it may be found. This means that if your 
product contains any of the restricted substances, chemicals or contaminants, it must be 
within the limit set for that substance.  
3. Legislation on  CE-marking , applicable to toys and electronic equipment, medical devices and 
a few other product groups . The letters ‘CE’ are shown on the products for which the 
legislation is applicable. They show that the product meet the safety, health, and 
environmental protection requirements set by the CE legislation.  
4. Product -specific legislation  set for a few, specific products. This type of legislati on mainly 
deal s with marketing requirements, for example, setting standards for selling a product 
under a certain name , such as when can chocolate be marketed as ‘milk chocolate’. Product -
specific legislation is set in addition to the requirements set in framework legislation and legislation restricting substances.  
 Have you established whether your product meets legal requirements? Or , have you modified your 
product for this purpose? Then you can move on and research further on the requirements that 
buyers  themselves establish . 
 Will they require a management system? Or, do they require additional certification s? In many 
industrial sectors, for example, ISO 9001 is a must -have . In food, for example, importers often 
require that you have a food safety management system.  
 
If you don’t meet these buyer requirements, it doesn’t mean your product will not be allowed to 
enter the market, but  it will be hard to find a buyer interested in it . 
 
Tips , incl uding  resources and  assistance : 
• Learn about legal and additional buyer requirements for your sector  on our market 
information platform. Choose your sector and look up the information on buyer 
requirements.  
• The EU Trade Helpdesk offers a list of legislation applicable to produc ts exported to Europe. 
Use your product code to find what legislation applies to your product.  
• Contact Open Trade Gate Sweden  with any ques tions you may have on regulations for the 
Swedish and European market s. 
• You can find out product withdrawals and market rejections on the RASFF (Rapid Alert 
System for Food and Feed) portal . This wi ll give you an idea of common problems with your 
product  in the market . 
• Similarly, RAPEX (Rapid Alert System of dangerous non -food products)  lists product 
withdrawals and border rejections for non -food products. Find your product to know which 
problems are common  with it . 
• Find out which private sector standards are used in your target market using the ITC’s 
Standards Map . 
• Follow the ITC ’s e-learning course  Introduction to Corporate Social Responsibility . 
  
  Step 6: In which market segment do your products fit?  
Why this step it important  
Different segments within the same market will give different importance to factors such as price  and 
quality , but also volumes, colours, flavours, trends , and anything else that may be relevant in your 
product ’s case . 
 
You need to identify where your product fit s to know in which segments to look for buyers or if you 
need to change anything to fit in a different segment. A better fit means a better chance of finding 
buyer s. 
 
What you need to know  
There are several ways of dividing a market into segments , depending on your sector and target 
market. The most importan t is to identify a group of consumers which you can target. By doing so, 
you can investigate the needs and requirements that your segment has, and adapt your assort ment 
to them . 
 
Price range and quality requirements are two of the most important factors when identifying a market segment. You need to find out in which price range your products fall  in your target country , 
and find out if your products meet the quality  requirements that apply in that segment. Note that 
both price range and quality requirements within one segment may differ between your existing markets and your new target market.  
 A typical market divided by in three segments according to price and qual ity, looks like the following : 
 
  A target market can also be divided based on  other factors, for example : 
- Age: Europe ’s population  is getting relatively older and products and services designed for 
the segment targeting older people specifically could offer opportunities  High -end:
-Top quality
-Speciality
-High price
-Small quantities
Middle range:
-Good quality
-Medium price
-Large quantities
Low -end:
-Reasonable quality
-Low price
-Bulk quantities- Background:  ethnic population s familiar with exotic product s could be interesting market -
entry segments 
- Function: final products for different uses, or ingredients and materials for manufacturers  
 
Tips , incl uding  sources and  assistance : 
• Find your relevant market segments  on our market information platform . Choose your sector 
and look up our information on market channels and segme nts. 
• Identify your current customer and draw up a profile based on indicators , such as 
demographics , that is, age, gender, households , etc . This will give you a starting point for 
identifying segments  in the European market . 
• Find products  similar to yours  on offer in your target country through internet research. This 
will give you information on price range and, to some extent, a general indication of quality.  
• If you offer raw materials or ingredients, you may not need to know in which se gment your 
product ends up , as different buyers distribute to different segments. In this case, you do not 
need to focus on segments in your research, but rather on finding the right buyers.  
 
Quote:  
Every country is different. Some countries like subtler c olours, other flashier styles. You have to 
realise that even if your product is great, it needs to go the right market.  
Andrew Mutisya  
Head of Business Development Bawa Hope, Kenya  
 
 
 
Photo by Maksym Kaharlytskyi on Unsplash   
Step 7: Through which channel can you reach your 
European buyer?  
 
Why this step is important  
Having identified your European market and segment, you can now start identifying your buyer. 
What is the role of your buyer  in the supply chain ? This is what you need to know in order to find the 
right player in the chain. It depends on what channels your products go through to reach their final 
destination : the end customer . In order to approach the right buyer, you must know what the market 
channel s look like.  
 
What you need to know  
Who are your target customers? Why would they buy  your products ? Would they buy your products 
from another player in the market? Identify what types of market players are active in your target 
market : importers, wholesalers, retailers, etc. By doing this research, you will be  able to map out the 
supply chain and see what type of partner fits best for you to do business with . 
 
Below are examples of different types of market players you can find in a market . Note that one 
company could play various of the se roles  at once : 
 
• Agents  or brokers : act as your representative in your target market,  do not import or own 
the product, but take a share for matching you with  buyer s. 
• Importers, wholesalers and distributors : import  your goo ds to resell them on the market, 
provide warehousi ng. Know the market and will therefore distribute your products to their 
own network s. Some operate in niche markets.  
• Manufacturers  and processors: use your product as input for their own produc ts. May also 
act as importers, but often buy from any of the market players mentioned above. 
• Retailers : sell to end consumers, but can also act as importers , although less common in 
direct trade than any of above.  
 In most cases, you will do business with a company in the middle of the chain, a European importer , 
which will sell your products onwards  to other players in Europe . 
 
Example of channel for a given product:  
 
 
 
Tips , incl uding  resources and  assistance:  
• Find which trade channels are most common in your sector. Look up your sector on 
our 
market information platform , and choose the study on market channels and sectors.  Developing 
country 
producerDeveloping 
country 
exporterEuropean 
importerEuropean 
processorEuropean 
wholesalerLocal retailer• Are you considering working with agents or distributors? Read about  the advantages and 
disadvantages of working with agents  and distributors  before making a decision.  
Step 8 : Where can you find a buyer?  
 
Why this step is importan t 
Once you have identified the role your buyer s play in the supply chain, the next step is to find out 
where you can meet them . Buyers also look for suppliers ; the trick is to find out where so that you 
can make sure you find each other.  
 What you need to know  
• The i nternet  is a very  important meeting plac e. Make sure your buyer can find you  online.  A 
good website is your online business card and often the first impression a buyer gets of you.  
Your  website  should be  easy to read,  use quality photos , be up to date and search engine 
optimised — to mention just some features that make up a good website. 
• Online vi sibility through sector  or trade  databases  and platforms also increases your chances 
of being found. Y ou can also find buyers active online on these lists . 
• Social media  allows you to connect with businesses for different purposes. For example, 
social networks,  such as  LinkedIn, Twitter  and Facebook connect you with people and 
brands. Media sharing networks, such as Instagram, Snapchat and YouTube can be used to 
raise brand awareness.  
• Sector associations also offer member lists. If you participate in a sector association, a buyer 
can find you. Likewise, you can find buyers in sector association  member lists . 
• Trade fairs  are important meeting places for buyers and suppliers. Visiting a trade fair will 
give you the chance to talk to potential buyers in person, and exhibiting will of course give you even more visibility. As a first step, however, you can also use the exhibitors list posted on the trade fair websites to find potential buyers in your sector.
 
• Trade missions  are naturally a great way of meeting potential buyers, since group s of 
companies travel together to meet potential buyers. Trade missions require an investment, 
but if you find one that matches your needs, it could be a good option.  
• Your country’s embassy in your target country may also be able to offer advice on where to find buyers.  
Searching on the i nternet , looking up potential buyers, is also a way of finding buyers. Their 
websites will give you a first imp ression of whether your products fit in their assortment.  
 
Tips , incl uding  sources and  assistance  
• See our tips on finding buyers
 on our market information website. Choose your sector and 
then click on the study on finding buyers. You can also use the study to look up the most important European trade fairs for your sector.  
• Invest in a professional website. Buyers do their research to o, and the internet is a good first 
place to look. Your website is the first impression a buyer gets from your company and can determine whether or not they want to get to know you.  
• Increase your network through social media, using Facebook, LinkedIn, In stagram, Pinterest 
and Twitter.  
• Find out which online platforms are used in your sector. You can find buyers and other 
suppliers there, and perhaps even promote your own company there.  • Find out if business support organisations, sector associations or your  government organise 
trade missions that you can take part of.  Check out their websites and subscribe to their 
newsletters to stay up  to date.  
• Contact your country’s embassy in the target country  to find buyers ; they may be able to 
assist. Make sure you su bmit enough information and be specific in your request, so you 
have the best chances of receiving practical and useful information. 
 
 
 
 
  
Step 9 : How can you approach a buyer ? 
 
Why this step is important  
Buyers are contacted every day with offers from suppliers. They do not spend much time on each 
offer they get. It is up to you to present an offer that grabs their attention: show your buyer that you 
understand their  business.  
 
What you need to know  
Show interest  in your buyer. Check their website, find out what they already offer. Do you have 
something new and different or the same  as the competition ? Find out about your buyers’  business, 
market, customers and needs. This way you can offer them  solutions that meet their  needs or match 
their  requirements . Presenting your offer in such a way has a better chance of getting attention ; it 
shows you know what your buyer  is looking for, and that you have a solution . 
 
Buyers operate according to the req uirements and trends that apply in their country and segment. 
These are the steps you have covered in the previous steps in this guide. Your assortment  needs to fit 
in your buyer’s supply chain. Buyers source products around the world. If they source all p roducts 
from one continent, region or country, they are less likely to make an exception for just this one 
product.  You can therefore look for buyers already sourcing in your region. Alternatively, you can 
look to complement your assortment , for instance , by working with other exporters in your region. 
 
Price will certainly be part of your offer, and part of what a buyer is interested in, but it is not the 
only concern a buyer has. Doing your research on your potential buyer, and being able to meet other needs and preferences they have can make price less important.  
 In the end, business is done between people. Understanding each other is important. Placing your product in your buyer ’s assortment and look ing at it from their point of view is one of the things you 
can do.  
 Make sure you are aware of cultural difference s and bear the , in mind when you approach your 
potential buyer. When you do your research on your buyer, also find out how business is done in 
their culture , such as whether being strictly busine ss or doing small talk is appreciated or not.  
  Figure 2: A buyer considers several aspects in the sourcing process. Do the products fit the market? 
Does sourcing from this company fit with the rest of the channel? Does communication with the supplier run smoothly? And is the price right?  
 
 
Finally, sending samples to your potential buyers will in many cases be part of the process. When you 
send samples, make sure the y are representative of the batche s or lots you will deliver. If you receive 
an order, deliver the same quality as your samples . If it is not possible, inform  your buyers of that to 
avoid them returning your products and creating a negative im age of your company. 
  
Tips , incl uding  sources and  assistance:  
• Learn about your potential European buyer  on our market information platform
. Look up 
your sector, then go to the studies on finding buyers and doing business.  
• Learn about the culture in your target market  so that you know how to approach your buyer 
in a way th ey can appreciate  
 
  
Step 10 : How do  you negotiate a deal ? 
 
Why this step is important  
A business deal commits both you and your buyer to obligations towards each other. Obligations, 
which you must then meet. This is why it is important to be well prepared and realistic both in your 
offer and in your expectations when negotiati ng a deal. You must be able to keep you r promise s. 
Failing to do so would damage both your relationship with your buyer and your company’s reputation.  
 You must also make sure that what you get out of the deal is good for your company. The 
expectations and obligations work for both sides.  
What you need to know  
An agreem ent between you and your buyer will list the terms and conditions under which your 
products are traded. This includes payment terms, delivery terms, minimum order packaging and other arrangements. The agreement specifies what is agreed and what you are bou nd to deliver . It 
defin es the responsibilities, liab ilities and risks.  
 Before you make a proposition, be sure to know your buyer’s need s. Listen well and turn 
requirements, needs and wishes into a proposition. This will be the starting point of your bargaining,  
if you are able to offer what your buyer is looking for.  
 
When entering negotiations, be prepared to know what you can offe r, so your buyer will also know 
what to expect from you . How much is your product worth in your target market? Which quantity 
can you offer at a minimum and maximum? Having your own terms and conditions is a professional 
way of doing business , it will save time spent discussing basic issues and avoid misunderstandings.  
 
Familiarise yourself with INCOTERMS
, which set rules and guidance for worldwide trade. INCOTERMS 
divide s responsibilities between exporter s and importers when it comes to coordinating and paying 
shipment, insurance, duties and customs clearance, and required documentation. For example, insuring goods during transport is important in case things go wrong, so you need to agree on who 
pays for it, you or the importer.  
 Prepare by also learning  more about your buyer. Check that the company you are looking to enter 
into a business relationship with is  reliable  and financially sound. J ust as you did before approaching 
a buyer, take some  time to learn about the culture your buyer comes from. How ar e business 
negotiations done? How can you best behave and what can you expect in return  when negotiating a 
deal ? 
 Finally, if t he negotiations between you and your buyer are successful and lead to a contract, it 
means your agreements will be confirmed in writing and legally signed. A contract includes at least 
the following:  
• Product description: description, quality, quantity, certificates and other details  
• Delivery : according to  applicable INCOTERMS ; 
• Price : including currency ; 
• Payment conditi ons: means and time of payment ; 
• Documents : commercial invoice , packing list , insurance , certificate of origin , certificate of 
inspection , customs documents , other d ocuments . 
 Once an agreement has been reached, it is important to stick to it. Not meeting your obligations will 
damage your reputation and could lead to loss of future orders. Delivering what you promise, 
according to what you have agreed, sets the basis for future, long -term, business with your buyer.  
 
Tips , incl uding  sources and  assis tance : 
• Familiarise yourself with how business is done in Europe in your sector. Look up your sector 
on our market information platform  and read our studies on doing business in Europe.  
• Learn about the business culture of your buyer  in order to prepare for negotiations.  
• Research the company you want negotiate with. Credit insurance companies and local 
chambers of commerce may have company information  you can use . 
• Make sure you know the INCOTERMS rules , which are used in in ternational contracts 
worldwide.  
• Know what will be included in the contract you are negotiating. You can look up the ITC 
model contracts as examples , so you know what you can expect and what you need to focus 
on in your preparations.  
• Make sure you know which costs to include when you calculate price. Follow this example of 
export pri cing for an overview.  
• Follow the ITC’s e-learning course on export sales and negotiations  or introduction to cross -
border contracts . 
• Watch this video for exporters from the US on b usiness travel abroad . While some 
information is specific  for American businesses , much of it is useful for you as well. 
 
 
 
Photo by Cytonn Photography  on Unsplash   
Step 11 : How can you organi se logistics and customs 
procedures ? 
 
Why this step is important  
Shipping your products to Europe and clearing them through customs is putting your business deal 
into practice. You must organise this well for the process to run smooth ly. If things go wrong, the 
consequences can be costly and an unhappy  buyer . 
 
Knowing what the customs procedures are and which logistics options you have to choose from will allow you to make the right decisions.  
 
What you ne ed to know:  
 
Shipping and logistics  
There are different ways of transporting goods to Europe, the means of transport that provides the best option for you will depend on your home country and product. In general you can choose from  a 
combination of:  
• Truck : highly flexible, bulk and finished  goods ; 
• Rail: limited flexibility, bulk and finished goods ; 
• Air: faster, expensive, high -value finished goods ; 
• Marine: slow, large volumes, cheap, bulk and finished goods ; 
 
There are several international freight forwarders and logistics agents for you to  use. Some include 
all documentation needed for international trade in their services, others only arrange 
transportation.  Discuss the different options with your buyer.  
 Documents for customs clearance The following documents are need ed for customs clearan ce in Europe:  
• Customs Import Declaration (SAD): All goods imported into the European Union (EU) must be 
declared to the customs authorities using the  Single Administrative Document  (SAD) . This is 
the common import declaration form for all EU Member States . 
• Commercial Invoice: The commercial invoice contains the basic information on the transaction and it is always required for customs clearance.  
• Customs Value Declaration : The Customs Value Declaration is a document, which must be 
presented if the value of the goods exceeds €20,000. The main purpose of the document is 
to fix the customs value for taxation and apply tariff duties.  
• Freight Documents (Transport Documentation): Bill of landing, FIATA b ill of lan ding, road 
waybill (CMR), a ir waybill (AWB), r ail waybill (CIM), ATA Carnet, TIR Carnet , among others.  
• Freight Insurance: The insurance invoice is required for customs clearance only when the relevant data do es not appear in the commercial invoice . 
• Packing List: The packing list (P/L) provides information on the imported items and the packaging details of each shipment , including weight, dimensions, handling issues, etc.  
 Taxes and duties  
All EU member states apply the same common customs tariff (CCT). Different rates of duty apply to different products , also depend ing on the origin.  
 When classifying your goods, the European Union uses a system called the Combined Nomenclature 
(CN). The first six digits follow the international Harmonised Systems Nomenclature (HS codes). The specifications adding to the HS codes are specific to the European Union , going to eight and 10 digits.  
 Correct classification is important as it determines applicable duties. You also need the correct classification for your shipping documents. If your products are not classified according to the correct CN code, it may result in delays in clearing your goods.  
 
Note that the same Combi ned Nomenclature is used for sta tistical data, as presented in 
Step 4: Is 
there a Euro pean market for your products?  
 
VAT (Value -added tax) is not harmoni sed in Europe . VAT on imported goods is paid according to the 
rates th at apply in the target country . 
 
Tips , incl uding  sources and  assistance:  
• Look up information on doing business in Europe for your sector  on our market information 
platform . Choose your sector and read our study of tips on doing business in Europe.  
• Have a good understanding of how international shipping works before you investigate your 
options. This video describes the basics of shipping . 
• Research the best ways of shipping your goods to Europe. Contact different freight forwarders and logistics agents and compare their offers and services.  
• Contact Open Trade Gate Sweden
 with questions on official rules, procedures and technical 
requirements that apply to exports to Sweden and the European Union.  
• Read up on the documents that are needed for customs clearance in Europe . 
• Get familiar with export documentation . 
• Follow the ITC’s e-learning course Introduction to International Transport and L ogistics . 
• Look up which rates of duty apply to your products in the EU Trade Helpdesk . First identify 
your product code, based on the Combined Nomenclature. This will help you to obtain and 
provide information on, among others, import duties.  
• Look up the VAT for your target country  on the European Commission website . 
• Look up which tariff rates apply to your products  on the EU Trade Helpdesk  
  
 
 
 Notes:  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------  --------------------------------------------------------------------------  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------
  
Step 12 : How can you grow your export business to 
Europe ? 
 
Why this step is important  
Getting a first order is a milestone . Keeping the orders coming means doing and staying in business.  
Innovation, new products , new services, staying ahead of the game and identifying new 
opportunities are all possibilities.  In all cases , to become a long- term supplier,  you must establish and 
keep good relations  with your buyer s. 
 
Trust is key in a good relationship. Your buyer needs to know that you are honest with them , and 
that if there are any problems or if something goes wrong, you will let them know immediately.  
 
What you need to know  
Clear and honest communication is important when building a  good relationship with your buyer. 
Being honest means not raising expectations you cannot meet ; simply keeping your buyer up  to date 
is equally important . Keep your buyer informed of developments in your company throughout the 
year, also when there are no running orders.  
 
European buyers expect to be kept informed , not only about good news, but definitely about 
problems , such as  delays and quality issues , as well. If something goes wrong, your buyer expects you 
to inform them immediately. This means giving them time to take action towards their clients. 
 
Transparent communication is a way of showing you understand your buyer’s needs. In addition, you 
can show an interest in them  to get to know their business better. This will allow you to better 
understand their interests, which could even lead to more business opportunities.  
 Be available to your clients, make sure they can reach you and reply to their enquiries and emails within  a day. If the request is complicated  and you need more time , still reply to let them know you 
have received the request and that you will look into the question.  
 Finally, be aware of cultural differences. Continue learning about the culture of your buyer , just as 
you started learn ing about their business  when first approaching them . Remember that there are 
cultural differences across Europe, and no two countries are the same. Always bear in mind  the 
common business practice s in your target country , such a s when to schedul e meetings, dressing 
codes , greeting s, giving gifts , and so on. That way you will know what your buyer s are used to, what 
could embarrass them and what they are likely to appreciate . 
 
Tips , incl uding  resources and  assistance:  
• Check out our tips on doing business in Europe
 for your sector. First choose your sector, from 
there click on the study on doing business in Europe.  
• Learn about the culture in your target market  and bear cultural differences in mind when you 
communicate with your client.  
• Be clear in your communication, keep your client updated about any changes ; also when you 
have negative news. If you have many buyers , keep them up to date by sending out 
newsletters , for example . 
• Be easy to reach and reply quickly to emails and other requests  within 24 hours . 
• Show your client that you are interested in their business. 
• Only promise what you can deliver.  